what is the least amount of time you can
spend in the gym and still make gains a
lot of Fitness content including most of
my own content doesn't really answer
this question for the most part Fitness
creators use what I'd call a maximalist
approach to training this means you
train for as long as you need to to
maximize progress in other words they
have a one hour workout would get you 98
of the results and a two hour workout
would get you a hundred percent of the
results the Maximus would say you should
train for two hours but maximalism isn't
always the best in fact I would say that
minimalism is probably better suited for
more people even if it gets less
attention that's because most people see
Fitness and bodybuilding as merely part
of their lives not their whole lives
there's also a lot of people who just
straight up don't enjoy training at
least not yet and for them a minimalist
approach can provide an easier starting
point my brother is one of these people
he loves Golf and outdoor activities but
he doesn't like lifting weights and he
doesn't like the gym recently he started
having hip pain and noticed that his
strength was lacking at work so I wrote
him a very minimalistic program that
only takes him 20 minutes once a this is
the exact program he does one push
exercise one Pull exercise and one leg
exercise once a week and it's working
great his strength has improved and his
hip pain is completely gone but even if
you are more of a maximalist like me and
you're okay with bodybuilding consuming
a lot of your lifestyle there are going
to be times when you're going to want to
focus on other things work school kids
travel and so on and knowing how to
train like a minimalist will be
important knowledge for you to have so
let's get started with what the
scientific literature has to say about
the minimum training required to make
progress in strength health and muscle
mass for strength it's actually pretty
simple just one heavy set done one to
three times per week will be enough to
induce significant strength gains for
most people to support this the 2017
meta-analysis analyzed nine studies and
found that 81 percent of strength gains
were made from Simply doing one to four
sets per exercise per week so if you
wanted to increase your squat Max As
Time efficiently as possible you could
do something like this where you squat
two days per week and on each day you
just do one heavy working set for one to
three reps if you have the time you can
optionally add one to two back offsets
with lighter weights which research has
shown can boost strength a little bit
further it really doesn't take much to
see measurable strength gains because
the most important factor for gaining
strength is exposure to heavy loads so
for strength you can get away with doing
very little total lifting as long as
when you do lift it's reasonably heavy
ideally coming in the one to five rep
Zone this is actually what I'm doing
myself at the moment for the power lifts
as I'm focusing more on bodybuilding now
I just Squat and deadlift once per week
at a high effort and with relatively
High loads for health even less is
required this 2022 systematic review
which pulled data from 16 studies on
mortality cardiovascular disease cancer
and diabetes found that just 30 to 60
Minutes of lifting per week was enough
for quote maximum risk reduction in
other words you can see maximum health
benefits with just a half hour to an
hour of lifting per week it really
doesn't take much however for muscle
gain it is a bit more complicated that's
because unlike strength and health there
there's a much clearer positive
relationship between training volume and
muscle hypertrophy training volume of
course is simply the amount of work you
do and it's typically estimated as the
number of sets per week so let's say you
did one set for your quads per week that
would be considered very low volume and
wouldn't cost you very much time at all
on the other hand if you did 30 sets for
your quads per week that would be very
high volume and you'd be spending a lot
of time in the gym now if you've been
following me or anyone else in the
science-based fitness Community you've
probably heard that around 10 sets per
body part per week is a really good
Target for most people most coaches will
recommend splitting those 10 sets up
across at least two workouts per body
part so for example you could do five
sets for your quads on Tuesday and five
sets for your quads on Friday but
regardless the blanket recommendation is
10 sets per muscle per week and more
advanced trainees may seem marginal
gains by going up to 20 sets for some
body parts but does this imply that 10
sets per muscle per week is the bare
minimum what if you did 9 sets per week
instead of 10. or what if you did five
sets but you get half the gains of 10
sets but if you only did one set per
week would you make any gains at all
well luckily we do have the signs to
answer these questions and the results
may surprise you this gray bar
represents 100 of the gains possible if
you did 10 plus sets per week this is
your maximum possible gains doing just
one to four sets per muscle per week
just one to four sets will get you not
ten percent of the gains not twenty
percent of the gains but 64 percent of
Maximum gains think about that one set
per week is nothing you can pause the
video now go to a set of bicep curls to
failure and take you about 30 seconds
and that alone would get you in the
range of 64 percent of your bicep gains
for the week if you do decide to do a
little more let's say five to nine sets
per week that would bring you up to 84
of Maximum gains but it's actually even
better than that for the minimalist
because there are a number of strategies
we can use to get even more hypertrophic
bang for our buck out of the limited set
we do this can close the gap even
further and get us ever closer to
Optimal while doing less but before we
dig into those I should point out that
the figures I just discussed do have a
few limitations first the meta-analysis
they come from pull the results of 15
studies but the majority of those
studies were on untrained or quote
recreationally trained subjects only two
of the studies were done on properly
trained lifters still of those two
studies the ray of paper found no
difference between three sets versus one
set per session taken to failure and
this alstroski paper found no
statistically significant difference
between 3 6 or 12 sets per week again
all taken to failure although I should
note that there were non-significant
Trends in favor of the high volume group
second these studies are all reporting
averages on average people will make 64
percent of Maximum gains by doing one to
four sets per week but that doesn't mean
that everyone will make exactly 64 of
Maximum gains for some people that
number will be higher for some people
that number will be lower I should also
make it clear that as you gain more
lifting experience you do tend to
require more volume to keep making
progress at a similar rate however this
doesn't mean that you can't still make
measurable progress by doing
substantially Less in fact there are
highly veteraned bodybuilders that not
only make do but thrive on low volume
protocols Dorian Yates is considered one
of the greatest ifbb pro bodybuilders of
all time and this is what his chest
training looked like he hit it chest
once a week with just one set to failure
per exercise for six to eight reps for
him that meant a weekly chest volume of
get this four sets per week and he built
a chest like that of four sets per week
now Dorian Yates obviously had some
pharmaceutical enhancement on his side
but they're examples of elite natural
minimalists as well Jeff Alberts is one
of the most decorated natural
bodybuilders of all time and this is one
of his current pull workouts where he
trains back biceps and hamstrings two
sets of seated leg curls two sets of
rdls two sets of lap pull downs and two
sets of cable bicep curls that's it
he'll do some version of this workout
twice per week so for the most part he's
only doing four to eight sets per muscle
per week of course they're all very high
exertion and masterfully executed and
you can't argue with his results there's
also people like Martin Birkin who
inspired a generation of minimalists
with his famous around itis article
explaining how so many people waste
their time in the gym by not tracking
workouts doing too much junk volume
including way too much AB training and
spending more time warming up than he
does for his whole workout it's also
worth mentioning that so far I've only
been talking about making gains but
sometimes people just want to maintain
what they've already built there's
nothing wrong with maintenance phases
and in this case you can get away with
even less to study from Bickel and
colleagues found that subjects were able
to maintain their muscle mass for eight
months even when they drop their volume
all the way down to one-ninth of what
they were doing at Baseline it's a lot
easier to maintain your gains than it is
to build them from scratch now don't get
me wrong I love maximalist training
right now I personally don't mind
spending one to two hours in the gym a
day but there are times when I need to
use a low volume minimalist routine and
my point with the video so far is to
show that minimalist training is a lot
more effective than many people realize
as especially if done correctly okay so
with all this theory in mind let's dig
into some of the best minimalist
training practices the first minimalist
strategy is to push yourself harder than
usual you can have it both ways if
you're gonna do a lower quantity of work
you need to ensure that that work is
high quality this means you need to
execute each and every set as close to
perfectly as possible the lower your
volume is the higher your intensity
should be to compensate and that's my
most important tip on a minimalist
routine most sets should be taken all
the way to failure so an rpe of 10 or at
least within a rep or so of failure so
an RP of nine or so the second
minimalist strategy is to use drop sets
in his textbook on the science and
development of muscle hypertrophy Dr
Brad schoenfeld suggests that drop sets
can be used to increase training volume
without substantially increasing session
duration to make workouts more efficient
now a drop set is when you extend a set
Beyond failure by dropping the weight
back and Performing more reps after your
usual stopping point this allows you to
get more high tension reps without
killing time by resting
reps are high tension because the
muscle's already been to failure once
generally speaking after I hit failure
once I'll drop the weight back by 25 to
50 for my drop set and then I'll take
that weight to failure again without
resting in between the third minimalist
strategy is to use so-called sensible
supersets now a superset is when you do
two exercises back to back without
resting in between it's very common for
people to do supersets for the same body
part so like supersetting a bench press
with dumbbell flies but research tells
us this is a mistake this 2020 study
found that training performance was
decreased when supersets were performed
on exercises that trained the same
muscles however when supersets are
performed on exercises that don't train
the same muscles both exercises can
still be maximized while saving on time
so it would be smarter to superset your
bench press with a dumbbell Row for
example since your pecs will be resting
while your back is working and your back
will be resting while your pecs are
working it's also fine for sensible
supersets to be somewhat random for
example you could superset leg press
with lateral raises on a full body day
because the muscles involved on the
2xers sizes don't overlap now if you
were to break down how you actually
spend your time in the gym you'd find
that most of your time is not actually
spent training but resting in between
sets out of curiosity I did this myself
and tracked a random push day where I
recorded the exact amount of time I
spent lifting versus the amount of time
I spent resting and this is how it broke
down the entire workout took me one hour
and 10 minutes so 70 minutes total of
that 70 minutes I only spent 14 minutes
actually lifting and I spent 56 minutes
resting that included water breaks
socializing with gym noobs and taking
photos with fans so only about 20
percent of my work I was lifting and 80
percent was rested now I may rest a
little bit longer than some but I can
guarantee that most people will find
that at least half their time in the gym
is spent resting in between sets this
tells us that if we want to make our
workouts faster an obvious solution
would be to use shorter rest periods but
there's a problem with this research
shows that shorter rest periods tend to
be worse for hypertrophy because you
can't fully recover in between sets so
resting one to four minutes between sets
is the typical science-based
recommendation however there is evidence
showing that if you gradually reduce
your rest periods over time you can
still maximize hypertrophy because your
cardiovascular endurance will improve
allowing you to recover faster in
between sets in other words you can
start by resting say two minutes between
sets in week one then rest for 15
seconds Less in week two 15 seconds less
again in week three until eventually you
get down to just one minute rest in
between sets lastly the minimalist
should try to cut down on their warm-up
time whenever I'm in a time crunch I'll
just do three to five minutes on the
treadmill a few quick dynamic stretches
and hop right into it after a quick
General warm-up the minimalist can
choose exercises that don't require as
many warm-up sets for example if I do
barbell back squats I'll generally need
four or five warm-up sets to even get to
my working weight and then I'll usually
do two to four more working sets from
there that takes a lot of time but if I
do a machine hack squat I'll only need
two warm-up sets before I start the real
working sets so by prioritizing machine
exercises that require less warm-up you
can cut down down on your total training
time as well now before we wrap it up I
want to quickly announce that I just
opened up a new program for pre-sale
that's designed to get you in and out of
the gym in under 45 minutes studies show
that one of the most commonly cited
barriers to resistance training is lack
of time so I wanted to create a routine
that could have people getting effective
and intense workouts As Time efficiently
as possible so if this sounds like
something you might be interested in you
can visit jeffnipper.com to check it out
the program comes in a two day per week
three day per week four day per week and
five day per week version depending on
just how busy you are and as a
minimalist routine it's appropriate for
all levels of advancement assuming
you're looking to prioritize time
efficiency the pre-order will last for
one week and if you pre-order you'll get
all four versions of the program and
you'll also save 30 off the regular
price so if you pre-order you'll have
all four versions of the essentials
program forever if you missed the
pre-sale you'll just choose which one of
the programs you want based on your
schedule pre-order lasts until next
Sunday October 23rd and if you pre-order
now all four versions of the program
will be delivered to your inbox on
October 23rd if you're watching this
after the pre-order is over I'll leave a
discount code in the description box so
you can still save some money if you
want to pick it up so that's it for this
one guys thank you so much for watching
don't forget to leave me a thumbs up if
you enjoyed the video subscribe if you
haven't already and I'll see you guys
all here in the next one