Strength is the mother quality of all
the other qualities. Without a
foundation of strength, you cannot build
anything. In marathon running, it's been
proven that putting athletes on a heavy
low repetition strength regimen, it
makes them race faster. The pull-ups are
one of the best general strength
exercises.
Most people would like to have some
level of endurance, some level of
strength and feel healthy and presumably
look however they want to look. But
let's set aesthetics aside for the
moment. How do you think about this
thing we call fitness? Well, first of
all, Andrew is uh strength is the mother
mother quality of all the other
qualities. Without a foundation of
strength, you cannot build anything. So
any athletic event requires a base of
strength. of course that uh shot pooter
is going to need much more strength than
triathlon athlete but they all need
strength. Speaking of which uh in
triathlon in marathon running in
distance uh in cycling it's been proven
that putting athletes on a heavy low
repetition strength regimen the kind
that doesn't really add muscle but just
makes you stronger neurologically and uh
it makes them race faster. So once
you're stronger everything becomes
easier. How much stronger you need to
get, that will vary. In the Soviet
Union, they had something called the
model athlete. So, they figured out that
for every particular event, your odds of
succeeding are going to be much higher
if you're able to, you know, squat this
much or bench this much and jump this
high and so on and so forth. And this is
easy enough to find these numbers for
your individual sport and talk to
various coaches. for people who are not
competitive athletes who just want to
enjoy life, you just need to think about
uh having a reserve of strength for
whatever it is that you might do. So
look at some PT standards in let's say
in the military or in law enforcement
and possibly apply them to yourself. As
long as you're mobile, as long as you're
symmetrical, and those are the things
you have to address first, you need to
look at the work of uh Greg Cook for
example, then strength has to be your
priority. Once you have reached a
certain level strength that's
appropriate for your sport or
appropriate for your lifestyle, at that
point, you can just maintain it and
focus on other qualities. What movements
do you believe, if they exist, all
people should include in their weekly
routine? some place when thinking about
how to develop perhaps maintain but for
most people it's going to be the goal of
still achieving some strength okay
strength increase excuse me I think
there has to be a very low quantity of
exercises just very few exercises you
want to focus on and uh I'm going to
give you some options to choose from so
what we try to do at Strong first in my
company my school of strength is we try
to provide people with various simple
very low tech high concept ways of
addressing uh reaching their needs is
because for one reason or another, for
this individual, the barbell is the
preferred tool. For another, it's a
kettle bell or body weight or some or
something else. So, I'm not going to say
that if you don't do kettle bell swings
or barbell squats, you'll never amount
to anything. That's just not true. If we
are looking at uh at the barbell, I
would start out with the narrow sumo
deadlift and the narrow sumo deadlift.
So, if you look at powerlifters, an
example would be classic example would
be Ed Con. That's a narrow stance sumo.
I'm not talking about wide sumo. That's
a very sports specific event. And uh you
practice that first. You learn how to
hip hinge. It's extremely important to
learn how to hip hinge. Again, uh Stuart
stressed that how important it is for
your back health and for longevity. So
you learn to do that. Then whether you
decide to pursue deadlift or not, if you
decide not to pursue high numbers in the
deadlift, maybe it's not appropriate for
you or maybe you're liking the coaching.
A fantastic exercise for everybody is a
zer squat. So in the zer squat, you hold
the bar like this in the crooks of your
elbows. So it's resting right here. It's
possible to pick it up off the ground,
but it's, you know, it's an advanced
skill that's it's an advanced skill.
Better just to walk it off the rack. The
advantage of the zer squat over, let's
say, the back squat or the front squat
is even if you have messed up shoulders,
wrists, elbows, you still can do that.
coaching uh the zer squat is very easy,
very simple and you have tremendous
reflexive stabilization
uh of your midsection. It's just very
very powerful. So you acquire that skill
of getting tight. So getting high
numbers on that exercise in the zer. So
let's say an athlete could shoot for
double double body weight. It that's
that's a really good goal. you find some
pressing exercise and again uh if we're
sticking with the example of the barbell
the bench press has gotten bad
reputation you know thanks to the gym
bros and you know all gym broses do is
they bench pretty much well these days
they also check out their phones I guess
but if you look at athletes they
athletes who also do some lower body
work some posterior chain chain work and
something for the midsection and again
zer squad could address that they are
making a great use of the bench press so
it's nothing. It's a very simple
exercise. Well, not very simple. It's a
relatively simple exercise and uh unlike
other pressing exercises, it allows you
to make strength gains with a very low
volume of training. So, you can do
several sets of five once a week in the
bench press and keep getting stronger.
Good luck doing that in the overhead
press or the one- arm push-up or
something like that. So, those are just
a couple examples. Uh there are many
other examples. You can do snatch grip
deadlifts. You can uh list is very very
long. We can address the same thing in
the same way with kettle bells. You can
look in the body weight exercises, but
you need to find several exercises that
have a reputation for building strength
that reaches beyond the ability to do
this exercise. If you just do curls, you
know, you're going to do you're going to
get better at curls, but not at much
else. So, you find several exercises
that you enjoy, that don't hurt you,
that uh you uh have the equipment
available, that you got the proper
coaching for, and you pretty much stick
with them. And there's absolutely no
reason for you to change these
exercises. It's possible to change them
on the margins, you know, from a wide
grip bench press to narrow grip bench
press, squats with a pause, and so on
and so forth, but you don't really have
to do uh a great variety of things.
Would a combination across the week of
some sort of squat, let's say the zer
squat, perhaps a kettle bell swing or
something else for posterior chain
pullup and dip be a fair fairly
comprehensive program? Absolutely. Yeah,
I'm a fan of dips. I like dips a lot. I
heard you say that you uh were some
years ago you said that you were using
dips for economy of time. Um and I
started getting into dips. I haven't
quite figured out the best way to load
dips once because once you get past 15
20 repetitions of the body weight dip,
it gets I turns into something else.
Sure. Absolutely. Uh turns into aerobic
exercise perhaps. Not uh Luke's uh he
was a powerlifter from the golden age of
American powerlifting. He says anything
over six reps is bodybuilding. Yeah. I'm
trying to stay in the lower rep range
today. I'll talk about this with you
more uh because I think a growing number
of people both men and women who are
starting to do weight training or really
incorporate strength training into their
program are seeking a combination of
strength and perhaps endurance as well
without putting on too much size maybe
size and some select body parts. Well,
Andrew, I think they need to uh do
possibly several different types of
types of training. But going going back
to your examples, dips are fantastic if
you can uh if your shoulders can handle
them. if you know how to do them. It's a
great exercise, but not particularly
democratic. That's the problem. Uh you
mentioned the example of pull-ups.
Absolutely. Pull-ups are one of the best
general strength exercises. And again,
to your listeners, uh general versus
special. Special in Soviet terminology
just means sport specific. So the
carryover when you start doing pull-ups,
when you excel at pull-ups or the dips,
you are going to get a carryover so far
beyond these exercises, which is exactly
the reason you do that. So I like your
choices very much. Yeah.
[Music]
